and it's late for which I'm not of which
I'm not proud so
good afternoon everyone
lieutenant-governor how are you see you
bless you Carol
great to see you thank you all for being
here Judy as always
go through the a more formal way good
afternoon ever we have fair amount of
stuff to to get you up to speed on and
obviously we'll take we'll go through
this as fast as we can we'll take
questions afterward I think tomorrow
were at a different time Alex what time
tomorrow can you come back to me ask
Mahan we've got a call with the white
house tomorrow which conflicts with our
normal time so we're gonna be a little
bit earlier I think we're going at noon
12 o'clock tomorrow so it'll be right
here the only issue with that will be
and I'll speak for Judy you may not have
all your your data as buttoned down as
you would like my new that takes us it
takes Judy and her team a good amount of
that all the morning to get to where she
wants so we could be as accurate as
possible and again I'm honored to be
joined by my partner government as
always lieutenant governor sheila Oliver
Sheila great to be with you Commissioner
of the Department of Human Services
Carol Johnson we're gonna hear from her
to her left at least answering questions
if not jumping in on any number of
topics
superintendent Colonel at Callahan to my
right as I said she no longer needs any
introduction
the Commissioner of Health Judy purser
Kelly to her right a new face at least
as it relates to these conferences that
have involved me doctor Edie let's
medical director communicable disease
services inside the Department of Health
health dr. Lipschitz it's great to have
you here
an assistant commissioner another guy
we're familiar with Chris Neuwirth the
director of the Department of Homeland
Security's was here
Jared maples and our head of emergency
services in our offices Dan Kelly among
others are with us today we received 162
a new positive test results two cases if
I get this wrong Judy will correct me
two cases that were reported
yesterday in which were under further
investigation turned out both to be out
of state residents so they are now being
removed from our account and our
statewide total is now 427 so this is
increasing with a pretty steep curve as
we had expected and again you've got a
combination of a couple of things that
we have already previewed number one
you've got some amount of community
interaction and spread as part of this
and importantly a lot more people are
getting tested and I'm happy to say that
as of this Friday there will be another
big opportunity for folks to get tested
and Judy will get into the details of
that sadly we have learned overnight of
two additional deaths related to cases
of kovat 19 that brings the total
fatalities of the 427 positive cases
that includes five fatalities again Judy
will get into the details at least as a
top line we're not going to get into a
whole lot of detail but she'll get into
the detail of all the positive tests
including by county I want to reinforce
the announcement made earlier today that
our statewide 2-1-1 call system is now
up and running as an additional resource
for residents residents can also text
and Jake Ovid and Jake Ovid to eight
nine eight two one one eight nine eight
two one one to receive text information
and stay informed or if they need live
assistance they can text their zip code
two eight nine eight two one one eight
nine eight two one one
we thank the United Way's of New Jersey
for partnering with us on this as Judy
invariably or I have said at these
gatherings as a general matter if you've
got questions about about this it's
1-800 to 2 to 1 2 to 2 and the website
is NJ gov slash health also in a number
of things in direct response to the
letter that I sent President Trump
yesterday in fact we got an initial
email replied Dan Kelly got last night I
think in around 11 o'clock I had a
conversation this morning with the US
Army Corps of Engineers in the person of
Major General Jeff milhorn
and his team general milhorn will be
coming here to Trenton tomorrow for a
meeting with me and my team to see how
the Corps can help us build out plans
for expanding New Jersey's hospital
capacity Judy could give you a little
bit of a sense of what that looks like
Pat Callahan and Dan Kelly have each
been up to their eyeballs in that again
I thank the Trump administration for
their swift response to our request it
has been and will continue to be a busy
day in addition to speaking with the
Army Corps we had a very constructive
call with our congressional delegation
from both sides of the aisle we went
through what what reality of the
coronavirus was in New Jersey which
obviously they know but we went into
detail steps we've taken help that we
still need from the federal government
in particular in terms of equipment and
things like the Army Corps FEMA which
has been very involved with us this week
and also the likely financial impact I
don't have a number for you but you
can't do what we have done and not have
a dramatic and I would use the word
dramatic impact
on not just people's lives we're seeing
that for sure but also on the health of
the state's budget and on the state's
revenues so we talked with a
congressional delegation about things
like getting flexible block grants as
fast and as soon as possible that is the
singular fastest and best way for us to
shore up our finances grants and
forgivable loans which are modeled after
the sandy essential services grants
and/or community disaster loans again
which Dan Kelly ran CDBG or other
programs to fund loans and grants in
addition to the proposed SBA program
operating subsidy funds for bus and rail
transit you can imagine the impact that
this is having on NJ transit as it is on
the MTA in New York etc and then lastly
but just as importantly real relief at
the individual level particularly for
those who are struggling and who need
help the most things like lowering
eligibility thresholds for snap or food
stamps and free and reduced-price lunch
student benefits to ensure that more
people can access the programs as well
as more flexibility to when the benefits
are received to reduce pressure to go to
grocery stores and reimbursement for
emergency child grant I could go on but
the Block Grants are a number one in
terms of what we need to shore up our
finances again an excellent call the
delegation has been extraordinary on
both sides of the aisle one example
earlier today congressman Donald Payne
and I spoke he serves on the Homeland
Security and preparedness committee in
the house he chairs the the subcommittee
which oversees FEMA activities FEMA
region 2 has been working hand in glove
with Colonel Callahan and his people to
set up some testing sites among other
things
congressman in the kernel had a great
conversation which will bear fruit Judy
and I and others will also be in a call
later today a combination of CEOs of big
health care systems on the one hand and
union representatives of our health care
workers on the other hand to try it try
to iron out some of the challenges
inevitably that we're gonna be facing
with with something of this scale
you know getting more consistency across
the healthcare systems making sure this
consistency and things like training
obviously personal protective equipment
day care how can we redo ploy folks from
other walks of life in to help etc and I
am additionally having a call with
representatives of the educate of the
educator community to just to walk
through the reality of the of the
coronavirus situation of the state how
we got to the decision we got to in
terms of closing schools and you know
where we see the road headed so what's
going on I want to reiterate that all
and you all know this but I want to
repeat it that all events of 50 or more
persons are canceled as a matter of
protecting public health i've ordered
this not just for some but for all
events and that includes a concern i
have and i could speak on behalf of pat
and law enforcement up and down the
state
we don't want events to go underground
into people's homes if people are
gathering in large numbers we don't care
where they're gathering it's a public
health concern and we will enforce this
aggressively over the coming days and
weeks if need be we need everyone to
take personal responsibility to do their
part to flatten the curve again a lot of
what you're gonna continue to hear about
over here
aggressive proactive tough measures to
flatten that curve you could see by
today's positive tests we're not there
yet by a long shot
which will over here lessen the burden
on the health care system and hopefully
save lives and keep more people healthy
but you're also gonna see is over here
we can't rely on this
for sure we can't rely on exactly when
that curve flattens so over here you're
gonna see us Judy Pat and others going
out aggressively trying to build out our
capacity to care for people simply put
this is not a time for anyone to be
bringing people together whether it be
for a wedding a funeral for John's
question yesterday a religious rite of
passage a large birthday an anniversary
or other party my team got on me kind of
hard yesterday after I said I wouldn't
break up funerals I still know though it
would break up a funeral but the fact of
the matter is we mean it when we say 50
people you're gonna have to and I feel
awful about this you're gonna have to
figure that out we mean it it's it's a
real public health reality anywhere a
group gathers is a place where
coronavirus easily spreads even if
you're showing no signs of the illness
this is a again a particular shout-out
to our youth you could still carry and
spread coronavirus we cannot run the
risk especially where they meet where
there may be multiple generations of
people gathering or even interactions
with older generations I take personal
responsibility for the public health and
safety of our state in a view or your
great-aunt are unhappy about this I am
sorry I feel badly but for your safety
and your and hers it is my highest
priority and we know this could be a
delicate and hard decision for families
we appreciate that as I've said all
along there's anxiety and we understand
it we respected our job is to be
straight with you
to do everything we can to get out ahead
of this and by doing so even though
there's short-term pain to lessen the
anxiety and not to increase it but these
are extraordinary circumstances and we
cannot continue either with the concept
of business as usual or equally out of
sight out of mind as I've said all along
this is no time to panic but it's just
as much no time for business as usual so
we urge you in the strongest possible
terms make the right call if not for you
and for your
families and friends and help prevent
the spread of coronavirus and help
flatten the curb
I want to spend a good part of my
remarks on the human and social services
responses we are engaged in and I'm
going to ask Commissioner Johnson to
speak to this in greater detail in a
minute there are many communities across
our state who rely upon the Department
of Human Services and their direct care
provider of provider partners rather for
daily life
many of these residents are considered
especially vulnerable to coronavirus it
is imperative that we do not disconnect
them from their lifelines during this
emergency to be clear we consider home
health aides and other direct support
professionals to be an essential part of
our emergency response team they are
first responders within our health care
system for many in these communities and
we thank them from the bottom of our
hearts we need these folks working and
caring for high-risk seniors who live
alone or helping individuals with
developmental disabilities many of whom
may face other very real health and
safety issues when I say we're going to
get through this as one family I mean it
where we are going to get through this I
say that unequivocally but we cannot
leave anyone alone at this time of
heightened anxiety Carol and the
department are also doing all they can
to ensure that the families of those
working on our frontlines our nurses and
hospital personnel lab technicians and
other frontline public health workers
our law enforcement and fire
professionals and EMTs are corrections
officers the women and men working in
our supermarkets among so many others
that all of them are able to continue to
access the critical childcare services
they need
let me say it this way we need everyone
who is part of our frontline army to be
able to get to work so we can beat back
the threat of coronavirus together and
in this child care professionals are
themselves essential players as Carol
will lay out in greater detail we're
taking extraordinary steps to support
those who need these services in these
critical service providers whether that
be extending emergency financial support
for families in our subsidy program who
are relying on child care during this
emergency ensuring providers in our
child care subsidy program are paid if
they close or providing greater access
to cleaning and sanitizing supplies we
must ensure a continuity of child care
for our frontline public health and
response workers now the department
doesn't do all of this on its own we
know another critical social service
support network exists within our many
varied communities of faith we have been
communicating daily with our faith
communities to help us get our message
out additionally the Interfaith Advisory
Council which is convened and chaired by
homeland security director Jerrod maples
has kept open the lines of communication
within our communities of faith fact you
have a call on for tomorrow morning at
what time 11:00 a.m. and there are I
might add in the Interfaith Advisory
Council over 3500 members and my guess
is you'll get good attendance given what
we're dealing with right now first I
want to thank our faith community for
embracing fully the need for social
distancing and I appreciate that social
distancing is in fact the opposite of
what many of our faiths teach our faith
leaders recognize that they're paramount
role is to protect their communities
they live that reality every day
pandemic or not we know that cancelling
a service or closing a sanctuary
entirely is not an easy call but in
these times it is the right call and may
I say this as clearly as possible
several
very dear friends among the faith
leadership community have come to me
over the past 24 hours
we need all walks of our life and in
this case especially our faith leaders
to adhere to the fifty person maximum
requirement in terms of gathering we
must get 100% compliance in our faith
communities and around the state and
because of these actions we know that
many of our houses of worship at the
same time are facing very real
challenges and we pledge to work with
them to seek out creative ways to
mitigate their pain and ensure their
long-term health but more than ever we
need them to keep spreading the faith we
need them to stay active in our
communities and help us disseminate
vital information and we need them to
rally our communities to send up their
prayers to lift up our state's spirits
Chile's heard me say this before I'm in
way over my pay grade here but I I know
they've certainly lifted my spirits and
I live every day with my favorite
scripture in my heart 2nd Timothy
chapter 1 verse 7 for God hath not given
us a spirit of fear but of power and of
love and of a sound mind and as I close
my comments today I ask every New
Jerseyan of every faith or those of no
faith to embrace these words this is an
anxious time we have said that we
understand the anxiety we respect it who
could blame you
our job is to be straight with you to do
everything we can to proactively get out
in front of this to beat down this curve
over here and over here to expand our
capacity to deal with this crisis for
the most part with our health care
workers bless them our heroes will we'll
take the lead over here
we need the 9 million New Jerseyans to
take the lead over here we need you to
to live this everything from washing
your hands with soap and water to social
distancing to sneezing and coughing into
your arm from not touching your face if
you don't feel well stay
no gatherings over 50 and don't go
underground moms and dads I'm asking you
explicitly to make sure your kids are
not having big house parties and I
promise you we're gonna be policing that
will we stay well we say stay off the
roads between 8 p.m. and 5 a.m. we mean
it just for essential folks to be out
there so for all of the above the 9
million of us will flatten the curve
over here our extraordinary leadership
in partnership with our federal partners
and our extraordinary health care
workers we'll do everything we can over
here I'll conclude by reminding folks
what I've said the past couple of days
the overwhelming amount of folks in this
state get it they've got their anxieties
but they understand what's before us and
what they have to do we don't have many
left but there still are folks who are
non-believers believe this trust us and
again if we get this wrong it's on yours
truly and we won't in the sense that
this is real and then lastly
particularly I can't say this enough to
our young folks you may feel like you're
above it all you may feel and you are
the picture of health but if you gather
you run the risk that you spread it from
one to the other and by the way you
could get sick and more importantly when
you sit with Grandma grandpa or an older
relative mom dad teacher coach you could
be unwittingly spreading the virus so
those who have anxiety our job is to
lower it to those who don't yet believe
and I don't think there are many left
believe trust us and to those who have
not heretofore cared care please for
your own sake and for the sake of the
rest of us god bless you all with that
it is my honor to introduce to say a few
words my partner in government the
lieutenant governor of the great state
of New Jersey
shell Oliver
governor Murphy I was so pleased that
the governor is working with the
congressional delegation to seek block
grants block grants allow us the
opportunity to invest resources where
they're needed without regulatory
restraint one of the things that many of
the administrators in our departments
are talking about many of us are
currently the recipients of federal
assistance to do a variety of thing and
I think no one more than Commissioner
Carol Johnson can attest to that we have
existing funding from the federal
government but we're hampered and
hand-tied by regulation so we're gonna
begin to outreach to the regional
administrators of the various federal
departments to see if we can work
towards waivers to give us flexibility
to use those funds other than a very
specific defined population one of the
things that people always lament about
well yes there's government help but I'm
never eligible for it we want to broaden
the universe of New Jersey
who are eligible for those things so a
governor I am so pleased that you're
having that conversation of with the
delegation also just want to touch on
Jared and the faith leaders and one of
the things I am hearing from faith
leaders is that because they're not
having mass because they're not having
services of course their revenue is
declining as well so in the next several
weeks I think we'll be working
internally in the administration New
Jerseyans are the most charitable people
to be found and I hope that we can set
up some methods in which we can call
upon the citizens and the residents of
our state to provide support to those
faiths
and then I'm conclude by saying that I'm
gonna give you a website make correct
website I would like you to to encourage
your readers and your viewers to go
online to NJ gov /d CA /d c a.a ID right
on that website you can apply for the
full menu of services that you could
potentially be eligible for it so it'll
take you three minutes on the website
and we can make a determination I want
you to know that it is anonymous and you
know it is confidential thank you
chill up for not only those words but
for your extraordinary leadership both
as lieutenant governor and has a
Department of Community Affairs which is
one of the biggest parts of our
government
so I'd love to ask commissioner purser
Kelly to comment as she does every day
and I cannot say enough about the
extraordinary work that she is doing and
I hear from all over the state as well
as your extraordinary team comment on
what we've seen overnight as you can see
folks the numbers are as we predicted
going up give you some more color on
that also how the healthcare system is
holding up Judy and anything you've got
in particular on testing welcome
Commissioner Department health choose
your Duty personality good afternoon
yesterday we received about 670 calls on
our hotline that's a total of over 8,600
calls so as the governor said we're
concerned that your calls are and
I'm in fashion that you're not held
waiting so to ensure that you get the
information that you need we've expanded
the call center to include the New
Jersey call center 2-1-1 as cases
continue to increase in the state our
concern about the healthcare systems
capacity also grows we talked a little
bit about that yesterday as the governor
and I have mentioned we're looking to
ensure that hospitals have the manpower
the supplies and the space to care for
residents
there are predictions that many parts of
the United States will have far too few
hospital beds if the new corona virus
continues to spread that's why we're
looking with our hospitals to develop
surge and capacity planning right now we
have identified additional capacity that
can be rapidly brought online 260
additional beds can be brought online
and will be prepared today 199 are in
the north eleven are in the central
region and 50 are in the south
additionally we expect 227 more beds to
come online within the next three to
four weeks we recently yesterday
completed a walkthrough at Underwood
Memorial Hospital and Woodbury New
Jersey we are working with the board and
administration Adam Spira health and I
want to thank them for this and we
expect that that hospital can reopen and
accommodate an additional
faites this facility would be a general
acute care hospital to absorb the surge
we're all expecting as you know all
hospitals in New Jersey are able to and
are expected to care for Kovac 19
patients
to meet the need for additional health
care personnel in the state we are
working with the New Jersey State Nurses
Association Judy Schmidt the CEO has put
out an alert to all nurses that hold an
active or inactive license in the state
for a call to action I will be
connecting with her on Friday at the end
of the week for the responses and the
follow-up additionally I signed an
executive directive yesterday that would
authorize hospitals to use New Jersey
certified mobile intensive care
paramedics in their hospital settings to
perform function and duties within their
scope of practice to enhance and
supplement the existing medical and
nursing staff
we're also working to protect residents
and health care facilities in our state
as you know last Friday we sent guidance
to all long-term care facilities to
restrict visitors in order to protect
this vulnerable population the only
exception is for end of life situations
this includes nursing homes assisted
living pediatric long-term care
facilities and to vent dementia care
facilities I cannot emphasize enough how
important it is they are most at risk as
we have learned from the outbreak in
Washington State at the Department we
are monitoring all breaks are all
outbreaks excuse me of respiratory
illnesses and that's defined as two or
more individuals in a facility with
symptoms no matter the cause we are
looking at them in all of our long-term
care facilities to be alert for any
problems
we also restricted visitors to
Department of Health licensed substance
use disorder and mental health program
as we mentioned previously we are
working to expand testing in our state
the Burgin testing site will be up and
running on Friday initially it will
collect specimens for symptomatic
individuals we will be prioritizing our
symptomatic in health care workers first
and our first responders this site will
have the capacity to collect 2,500
specimens
as you can imagine as we find more
positive cases the work for our local
health department's greatly increases
every day they work tirelessly boots on
the ground to investigate cases identify
contacts and take the appropriate public
health actions to support their
important efforts the department has
been working with Carrie Hawk itis the
Dean of the Rutgers School of Public
Health to connect his students with
local health departments I'm pleased to
say that that those individuals will be
redeployed next week and they will
provide the extra resources to carry out
this vital work to protect public health
as I mentioned previously New Jersey has
been expecting
the return of nine asymptomatic New
Jersey residents from the Grand Princess
cruise ship these individuals are being
held under CDC quarantine at the Dobbins
reserved Air Base in Marietta Georgia we
expect six of these individuals who are
identified as a low-risk to return home
today and to self quarantine for the
remainder of their stay about four or
five days now I will provide you with an
overview of new positive cases we are
sad to report today two additional
fatalities of individuals who have
tested positive
as we have seen across the nation and in
New Jersey both of these individuals who
are high risk over 60 years of age with
comorbid conditions where's our thoughts
and prayers are with their family today
we're announcing 162 new cases for a
total of 400 to Center our thinking
around this our first case in New Jersey
is March 4 on the 16th we reported 80
new cases on the 17th yes
here's the breakdown by county for the
cases where the counties we have
information on and these numbers are not
complete Atlantic 3 Bergen
Burlington 5 Hampton 5 Essex 12 Hudson
900 into Mercer 6 Middlesex 17 Monmouth
8 Morris 9 ocean for pasea gate
Somerset a union 12
27 that still need a County
we're still gathering those details the
ange age rage for the total positive
cases is five years
I know this is a difficult time for all
of New Jersey as the governor has said
repeatedly we will get through this
together all of you can do your part to
lessen the spread follow the governor's
social distancing distancing measures
please stay at home when you're sick
in practice respiratory etiquette wash
your hands frequently during the day for
20 seconds with soap and water
and practice general good health
thank you Judy again for extraordinary
leadership I think if you do the math
and this there is a chunk of unknowns to
be determined but you if you if you look
at if you've been listening the past
couple of days and you'll do the math 18
of the 21 counties now have a positive
at least 18 I should say because there's
about 30 unknowns at the moment the
exceptions right now being Cape May
Salem and Sussex and so as Judy
predicted when it was only a handful of
counties this is a statewide reality
clearly much more intense in certain
counties like Bergen than in others so
as we've said many times so thank you
Judy thank you to your team as we've
said many times in government it takes a
village
both folks within government across the
range of government agencies and
departments again we started studying
and trying to figure out how to react to
the coronavirus in January we
established our whole-of-government task
force on February 2nd or 3rd here we are
March 18th at every step of the way
trying to stay out ahead of this thing
and obviously it is a beast no matter
how you slice it but one of the most
important departments alongside health
is the Department of Human Services and
with that I'd love to ask commissioner
Carol Johnson to say a few words about
what her department is up to to help us
fight this battle Thank You Carol
in human services were actively working
with the frontline health and social
services workforce to support the
response our priorities are the health
and safety of the individuals we serve
the health and safety of our workforce
and the health attained through the
workforce of our critical partners in
communities across the state
first true Medicaid long-term care
program and our division on Aging we
help to support seniors across our state
who are homebound or those who are now
homebound because their congregate site
is closed and have limited natural
community supports that means the home
health aides private duty nurses at our
County led aging Network are a critical
workforce that is caring for our older
vulnerable residents in addition to in
nursing homes but as importantly in
their homes across the state we're
working to support older residents and
their care providers in maintaining
these services and working with our
community partners including by
mobilizing the nurse care managers of
our Medicaid health plans to do
proactive outreach to all of our
high-risk seniors and identify critical
needs like medication medical supplies
and food we're working with our County
offices on Aging to help them maintain
food for their Meals on Wheels program
and other senior feeding programs we're
also working with them on outreach to
seniors who are known to be so
we are also in close health in close
touch with the Home Health Aide and
personal care provider community to
identify issues and we had a large call
with them yesterday morning and we're
continuing to move as quickly as
possible to address issues they read
we're very focused on rides to critical
medical appointments that are provided
by our Medicaid transportation provider
or from programs to our County offices
on Aging we're working hard to continue
to secure rides to necessary medical
appointments and very focused on what we
consider life-sustaining services like
dialysis chemotherapy and methadone
treatment we're not alone in this work
we're closely coordinating through the
Emergency Operations Center the governor
stood up and working closely with
Colonel Callahan and general Beall and
others to make sure local emergency
management is tracking these critical
needs for our community-based high-risk
older residents second as our as the
governor mentioned we're doing our part
to support the critical child care needs
of those who need to work in this
difficult time and who serve or could
serve who are served or could be served
through our state's child care subsidy
program we're taking action to help
families in need of child care and those
centers that are able to remain open by
one waving co-pays in our state child
care subsidy program if parents are
unable to pay because of copa90
we're providing enhanced payments to
providers who are able to remain open at
this time and serve our childcare
subsidy in children we are providing an
enhanced payment of $100 per child in
subsidy per month to help support those
childcare providers we are going to pay
in our subsidy program based on
enrollment not attendance so that those
providers get the money that they need
even if a child who normally would show
up is not there we're continuing to pay
subsidies that are to those centers that
are forced to close so that at some time
we can hopefully bring them back online
and that they don't lose their business
in the short term because our subsidy
isn't available we're creating
flexibility in our subsidy program rules
so that it's easier for eligible parents
and parents who might newly become
eligible because of changes in their job
circumstance to enroll their children in
our childcare services childcare
providers who are able to serve critical
needs at this challenging time are doing
very important work we're grateful to
them every day for the work they do but
never more than in this challenging time
third there are the vital services that
we provide to adults with developmental
disabilities who live in the community
with support from direct support
professionals and those with
developmental disabilities who live at
home with support from their family or
other professionals we're grateful to
direct support professionals who are
working both in the community and in our
Developmental Center facilities who
support this critical population we've
taken several steps here including
temporarily suspending congregate day
programs for individuals with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities we're providing flexibility
to families who are able to employ
workers directly through our programs to
allow them to hire additional workers
quickly to support their loved ones as
needed we're also working through our
care manager partners to check in with
and identify needs for those with
physical disabilities who participate in
our personal care assistance program and
in other programs across the department
fourth on our list we're laser focused
on the needs of individuals with mental
health and substance use disorder and
the network of residential and community
peace providers who serve them we issued
guidance yesterday to our methadone
clinics which provide both methadone and
buprenorphine to individuals with opioid
use disorders methadone has a very
specific federal rules that govern how
it's prescribed we've worked with our
federal partners to create some
flexibility here for our clinics so the
day so that individuals might be able to
take more medication home where
clinically appropriate so that we can
reduce the volume in these facilities
and the amount of travel that
individuals
you to get there to get methadone
treatment buprenorphine does not have
these same restrictions and we are
working closely with our Medicaid
Centers of Excellence on opioid
treatment to make sure we're doing
everything we can to sustain individuals
who are in treatment throughout this
emergency and make no mistake this is a
challenging time for all but it's very
challenging in particular for those who
be served with mental health and
substance use disorders and we're
working very closely with our community
provider network to hot spot issues and
support their needs so that these
critical services can continue if they
want to talk briefly about the
individuals and families in our state
who are lower income and depend on our
programs for supports and those who are
at risk for or are homeless we are in
close contact with our partners across
the state who are the lifeline of
supports for this vital network we
hosted hundred person calls with both
the pantry and Food Network community
and we had a call with more than a
hundred providers this morning and who
provide homeless shelter services and
other vital providers across the state
we are continuing to support them in a
variety of ways we've changed many of
our rules to make it easier for people
to get and keep public benefits we've
extended benefits in both workers in
workforce new jersey our cash assistance
for 60 days for anyone whose case was
coming up for renewal in March or April
so that they don't have to take action
to renew their case we're extending all
of our emergency assistance cases
through at least April 30th we're
viewing this emergency as a good cause
exemption to the work requirements in
the work force New Jersey program and
snap our food assistance program and
we're suspending all adverse actions for
anyone for non-compliance including
suspending sanctions we're continuing to
work with a homeless shelter community
and are working on the needs that they
may have for cleaning supplies and we're
talking with them about how they can
implement guidance that has come from
both the CDC and HUD we and the
Department of Human Services will
continue to take all available actions
that we can with the authority that we
have and the waiver of that authority
under the governor's executive order we
also are expecting additional authority
under the legislation that's pending in
Congress that will give us access to
additional federal waivers to help
expand some of our services and we're
working on that now to be prepared as
soon as that legislation or to pass we
thank you from the bottom of our hearts
to the providers in the community to the
community organizations in the community
to the volunteer organizations and the
faith community that is standing up
during this critical time to continue to
serve the vulnerable populations who
have critical needs and are going to
continue to have printed critical needs
in the days ahead thank you
Thank You Carol
and cannot thank you enough for your
leadership on this and across the board
a couple of very quick items I'm looking
at Nikita we're gonna have something to
say on elections tomorrow so I could
maybe save you you or David's question
on that front I meant to say that
upfront secondly we don't have any
announcements today in terms of further
associate insane steps such as we did
yesterday with indoor malls but just
know that we're continuing to look and
month monitor what we've got in front of
us
for instance Paden a lot of his
colleagues are out last night trying to
sort of spot-check the state and we
still feel there are a couple of holes
in the system so we're looking at that
and thirdly while there's no particular
action associated with this as I sit
here we are intense discussions not just
with the federal government with the
White House had a good conversation with
the vice president yesterday afternoon I
mentioned we sent a letter in late
yesterday afternoon regarding the Army
Corps and Dan got a response last night
and we were on the phone this morning so
that's a good thing other areas I have
no news to report on PPE personal
protective equipment but that's
something which is still a significant
ask that we have been in addition to our
relationship with the federal government
and the congressional delegation cannot
say enough good things about them on
both sides of the aisle just their ashen
intensity what do you need for us to do
some of the best fighters in the country
in Congress happen to represent New
Jersey that's a good thing at a time
like this but also to say that we are in
constant discussion with a
a group of other states as well and I'd
say hi in that list or New York
Pennsylvania and Connecticut now they're
not the only ones but we are constantly
thinking through where our commonalities
are and there are many and if we can
combine forces and ask for X or Y we
will be stronger on that ask if we can
do it together I don't want to cut and
you went off but before we take
questions
Pat Edie Chris anything any of you want
to add ok please feel free to jump in on
any of the questions before us you're
good G ok let's take a few questions
please breath quick three things one
hotels and then they still okay to
operate as they are to what what area of
the state will County has the most need
for hospital beds and three the second
testing site in Holmdel do we know when
that will be online first hotels are
still open for business Pat to the best
of my knowledge although Pat's an
important guy because based on the
executive order that Sheila and I put
forward it gives Pat complete latitude
to add or delete entities from that list
so as if we're walking down here hotels
are still okay I'll let Judy answer both
the second and third question but I
would just say home bill we hope a
matter of days within bergen opening on
Friday Judy
in the Northeast yeah it's gonna follow
it's just gonna follow the spread of the
disease but we do anticipate that it's
going to be a statewide even Holmdel is
or pad or and or judy within a matter of
days after Burgin opens Chris
looking at each other to make sure we
agree with our answer I mean I just say
I don't know if Judy said total cases
you said how many overnight but total
cases to date by county top four bergen
a hundred and thirteen this is the
denominator is for 27 secondly is Essex
at 45 I know for instance esic
congressman Payne the county executive
they would like to try to figure a way
to work with Pat and FEMA and Department
of Health to get a drive through that's
going to be a little bit more off
Middlesex has 40 cases in my home county
of Monmouth have 32 those are the top
top four please
Commissioner Judy on testing to say Alex
has got the mic again with the the
off-white ivory colored glove and the
reason for that is for our streaming
services it doesn't do anything for
amplification to this room forgive me
for not saying that already plea so um
how many different kinds of kovat 19
tests are being used do we know it seems
like different medical groups and
organizations are adding them almost
every day now you've got the FEMA coming
in with their tests you've got another
drive-through test in Secaucus somebody
else is opening one is anybody keeping
track of this do they have to get FDA
approval do we know are there problems
in terms of reliability for these tests
false negatives or positives could the
skew our overall picture of what's going
on here and are there any suggestions
for people in terms of where they should
or should should not go look to get
tested looks like Judy answer and or
crush crush do you want to jump in so
thank you for those questions
I think the point of clarification is
that these sites are specimen collection
sites these are locations where
individuals who are symptomatic
present go through the process have a
nasal swab specimen collected and then
those specimens at the end of that
operation are brought to one of the
commercial laboratories for processing
so the process for specimen collection
is is basically standardized throughout
the state and then depending on where
the clinic opt is operating they'll send
their specimens to a particular lab like
West
lab core bio record
that's the same time that's what he's
referring to it's its collection on the
front end of which there are a number of
different places you can go the most
robust as a Friday will be the one I
think in Bergen County College but the
back end there's a limited number of
folks who actually perform the test
there's the Department of Health there
are a couple of hospital systems and
there there are I think three private
sector tests high scale by the way which
is important high-volume testing
companies yes hold on one sec Edie and
just quickly so the testing that's being
done on all these is all using the same
general procedure at all using what's
known as a PCR test that looks for the
virus itself these tests are all need to
be approved to the FDA before we just
can't go out and say hey I want to run
this test so
it's absolutely videos right it's
absolutely yes and you have to recall
that you know hack-attack in particular
and others those are not the high
throughput clinical diagnostic
laboratories that lab for this is an
important point Chris how many what's
their capacity daily there's a more or
less equivalent to what the state lab
can do between 40 and 60 or so whereas
the high throughput clinical diagnostic
laboratories and being the thousands
essentially
let's keep moving Chuck
on the numbers can you tell us how many
people who are positively or presumed
presumptive positive and infected have
been hospitalized and are currently
hospitalized and can you talk about the
numbers of hospital beds that are
currently being occupied in other words
you talk about the possibility of
shortages down the road what's the
percentage right now people in hospital
beds and on the numbers how many people
have been hospitalized because of this
and if any of those hospitalizations or
positive cases come from their scene
facilities and long-term care all good
questions that I don't have answers for
we do not have diagnosis 19 we do know
generally about 55% of all of our
positive cases end up in the hospital
a general number that will fluctuate
depending on the number of patients that
we have
do not have specific our tracking number
of individuals from nursing homes I
don't have that number today ask Alex
later we tracked that very diligently
because of the high-risk nature judy has
the 55% about held in terms of 55% of
positives either are or have been in a
hospital and the short answer is yes how
do we expect as time goes on as more and
more people get tested who have mild
their symptoms and milder illness in the
first place that those numbers will drop
you have to remember that early on we've
been testing mostly people who have been
the sickest to begin with so that
doesn't mean that 55% of everybody gets
sick with this one
old's church out it looks like about 230
out of 427 assuming that that number has
held
let's also remind everybody and again if
I get this wrong the health experts will
correct me that we have a lot less
visibility into the high speed high
scale commercial testing companies by a
reference quest
LabCorp the good news is they could do a
lot faster in a lot bigger scale and we
need that the challenging news is we
don't have it list at this point the
same insights as we would have in
particular into the Department of Health
and I also want to underscore something
that that had just said you know when
this testing when the first tests were
available particularly obviously at the
Department of Health you were by
definition testing people who were I
don't know I'm gonna use a term of art
here quite sick we are not yet gonna be
to the worried well you're still gonna
need a reason a permission slip
essentially to pull up to Bergen County
College on Friday you're gonna have to
have a health care counterpart that's
gonna deem that you're worthy of that
test but by definition the pool is gonna
be more healthy and less acute than the
original pool that we started with is
that a fair assessment
who have a primary care physician
however they do not have a primary care
physician and they are symptomatic
there'll be a screening there are
symptomatic we will develop a feedback
loop to make sure that every single
person that gets tested knows the result
within a certain period of time I can't
tell you specifically what that period
of time will be obviously working on
that but I want to make sure that
individuals understand
they will not be turned away I assumed
tomorrow that we'll have some of the
protocols for Bergen County ready to go
live with you all so you can hear it and
we'll disseminate that out through all
of our social media and other other
channels a question about the economic
impact that this is going to have we've
spoken with a number of small business
owners who say that this will cost them
a lot of their workforce or put them
under altogether will there be any state
aid available for small businesses or
has the SBA given any indication if they
might declare an ax murderer so so
several things Dan Kelly can correct me
if I'm wrong on the SBA front we put our
requests in we're waiting to hear back
and any more color you'd add to that
yeah we're checking that real time so
listen the the impact on small
businesses is unmistakable when you shut
restaurants and bars in a state our size
and you go take out only I'll give you
an anecdote last night my family and I
were living the same we're living
through this like everybody else first
two restaurants we called up to order in
from or closed so this is real I
mentioned this at the outset this is
going to have an enormous impact on the
finances of our state we're not we're
not immune I mean we were not alone in
that respect this is we are one of 50
where the impact is going to be
significant on individuals and workers
and all the things that Carol for
instance enumerated for so many of the
folks that her agency deals with but
also unemployment insurance work their
their working lives period secretary of
the Treasury for the federal government
last night said that he could see the
unemployment rate approaching 20 percent
that's double what it was in the Great
Recession small businesses you've
referred to large businesses certainly
aren't immune in our state state
finances so as I said if
at the end of our call with a
congressional delegation I said the two
words we all need you to remember more
than any other right now are Block
Grants the extent to which and Sheila
was extremely good on this the extent to
which we can get block grants we can
continue reaching deep into our
communities and helping the folks who
need it the most so thank you for that
Charlie you do you at this stage
consider the president to be a reliable
partner with the state right now I mean
there's been a lot reported about his
sort of early mismanagement of the
crisis his dismissive tone and some of
even inaccurate claims about about
testing and the like I was just
wondering do you think he gets it now
I'll leave history to the historians and
I and I have less interaction with the
president that I do with the
vice-president and their teams the
president and we were on a call on
Monday his rhetoric appears to be at
least in the past 24 to 48 hours
consistent with the challenge that we
have before us but it is the vice
president that we spend a Secretary of
Health and Human Services and their
teams respectively and I would just
repeat and it's worth repeating the asks
that we've had with you know with we're
persistent and will continue to be
forward leaning on those asks the most
acute challenge we have is with personal
protective equipment I know Chris
Neuwirth has has ordered a million and
95s the problem is and and he's doing
extraordinary work that could be five or
six weeks away so we got a fraction of
our ask we need we need more from the
strategic stockpile we've asked for
boots on the ground
FEMA Richard to has been very very good
this week this is since Monday they've
been at it I can't say enough good
things about how quickly the Army Corps
turned around by the way that was out of
a letter that I wrote the president in
fairness
in that case I I give him credit and
it's too early to determine but we've
spent a lot of time speaking with the
administration as well as our delegation
on the financial the question was asked
a minute ago we're gonna need an
enormous amount of federal help I'm see
I'm speaking as much as a former banker
not specific to New Jersey's needs but
the the national I think the national
appropriate level of stimulus stimulus
is something believe it or not in the
three to four trillion dollar range for
national stimulus and New Jersey will
quite happily take our fair share Alex I
think Charlie has a follow on you're
separate but coronavirus related do you
think it's appropriate for the highway
authority to be even considering a toll
hike amid this period especially when
the community and the journalistic focus
on this is severely constrained right
now I I don't know that I've got a
strongly held opinion I believe that
there are a couple of public hearings
today I mentioned this I think yesterday
so I don't have a whole lot of
visibility into it but I did I did ask
the two things be considered I know I
spoke to one of them which is that they
be live-streamed and please God they
will be and secondly which I may or may
not have mentioned yesterday I strongly
urge that the comment period be extended
given what we're going through and I
believe mahem that has happened is that
corrected both both fronts all right
thank you who else is not a stick
I got I have two things for you so are
you prepared at this point to say that
candidates staff and volunteers on
political campaigns from both parties
should stop all in-person voting for all
in-person voter contact and then are you
involved still with the DGA while this
crisis is going on in any way I'm not
sure that I'm prepared to say which to
say to any campaign no one no human to
human interaction there's not a lot of
it going on so we've already limited
interactions to 50 people of any kind
and then within that there's got to be
social distancing I can't recall the
last time I saw a an actual political
event happening you may know better than
I it's been a it's been weeks I think
not a lot going on so I I'm not sure I'm
prepared to say what we've said as a
general matter no more than 50 keep your
social distancing mind your P's and Q's
in it ought to be essential whatever it
is I saw Vice President Biden last night
for instance speaking on a live stream I
think from his house is that right yeah
in Wilmington and secondly on the DGA
very much involved but all of it by
telephone and in much more sort of
technical matters of laid-up that this
is consuming more than 24 hours of my
day right now thank you at least two
questions the first has the number of
unemployment benefit applications
exceeded what was filed on Monday I have
an answer for that Alex assuming we have
it we'll get that back too I don't I
don't know the answer
on Monday yeah no Monday was 15,000 your
s key if it has succeeded that since
then yes I don't I don't know unless you
yeah we'd get that for you okay and for
the kernel I'm familiar with two
weddings in Lake
that were shut down by local officials
because the attendance was so great are
you familiar with any other incidents
around the state that in which law
enforcement told people that they had to
clear out I wasn't even familiar with
the Lakewood honestly where we actually
have our Regional Operations
Intelligence Center trying to monitor
all that I'm on the phone every day we
keep Chris loosener who's the president
of the State Association of Chiefs of
Police so we're trying to just see what
is from what we're gathering the last
few days
people have been complying but for the
governor's point if they start not or we
find otherwise we will gank base in the
back yeah hi could you give a status
report on schools I assume they're all
now closed any particular challenges
that have emerged in these first days
doctor epaulette as he you won't be
surprised has been Manning his post over
the past couple of days to make sure
that things were going well we had a
sidebar again an hour to ago a Sheila
and Pat myself I think we think things
are good but I do think there's a one at
least one story we heard that troubled
all of us which is the meals again the
concerns we had were food access for
kids who don't get a good reliable hot
meal anywhere else other than school
remote learning and day care and I and I
think food every timeout was number one
in my list and we heard a disturbing
story that the food was prepared and
very few of the lunches or meals were
picked up and I think it's fair to say
Sheila was quite concerned about that I
was as well I think that we're trying to
get to the bottom of that is all right
not that we're not looking into it
further but he said that's that's normal
on a lot of times that the food is
prepared and that doesn't get out so
we're looking into whether it's other
distribution points whether it is the
privacy concerns if we have the ability
to deliver meals are we Kaitlyn are we
able to give out addresses of students
so where it's almost an hourly
conversation to make sure that we don't
fail in that regard multiple districts
or was that an isolated here or there
that was in one district that we heard
this was one district but it was a big
number and it concerned Sheila and me I
know it's a concern Pat and the rest of
us as well if we're gonna go to the
trouble of making the meals and we know
for sure that there are literally tens
of thousands in fact I think it's a
couple of hundred thousand in total kids
in this state where their only place
they're gonna get that reliable meal is
in a school we better darn well be able
to deliver the bacon one more at least
one state and a couple others are
considering closing schools for the rest
of the school year is that even on the
table at this point people want to speak
to that I could say unequivocally and I
literally mean this everything's on the
table but no decisions have been made
folks who have not yet asked so we'll do
one two three if we can't please
we've talked a lot about testing and
positive cases and how this is expanding
and so forth has there been any
discussion about trying to quantify
recovery exactly what does it mean if we
say a certain percentage of people are
recovered at what point how long does
that take
once they recover are they completely
recovered you know there were some
stories from China where they had
celebrations and then two days later the
guy got tested positive again do we have
enough information about this virus to
be able to say when it's considered
quote/unquote safe to be considered
recovered and when somebody could go and
for instance check on an elderly
relative II do you want to let me get
that I just want to answer it because
the answer is not really
and we're learning more about this virus
every day the CDC in particular is doing
those sorts of studies both on the
earlier people came in to the United
States and so forth and there are people
being swapped regularly every single day
so we're learning more about it all the
time we have some good general ideas but
if you ask for those sorts of specifics
my answer is no we can't
yeah well the general is like many other
viruses in this family or other things
you know we know about what the
condition period is you know about when
you begin becoming infectious we know
that there is the ability for this virus
to spread before you become sick but we
still think that when you're sick is
when you're spreading it the most visits
when you're sickest we know that after
you recover in your few oh well you may
still continue to test positive for this
virus it's less clear exactly what that
means if you test positive for this
virus going forward as to whether that's
what's known as viable virus maybe
whether it actually can affect other
people or not and certainly we think
that you're less infectious but if you
asked me for a hardened cutoff bike and
say absolutely for sure when anybody can
stop being infectious for when I can be
sure that they would not again become
answers Thank You Chuck
sorry thank you Alex
yesterday's actually with the executive
order telling the locals and counties to
comply generally with the state order
are you going back at the executive
order in Bergen and any thoughts on
Hoboken mayor's order to shelter in
space for that yeah so I'll leave this
specifics aside but we're looking at
each one of these she'll and I take each
one of these steps seriously again I'll
repeat what I said yesterday I haven't
found one person whose hearts not in the
right place but at the end of the day
the buck stops with us and we reserve
the right to overrule reverse whatever
whatever it takes I would only say this
we spoke to mayor Bala and his team last
night that is a recommendation from him
in Hoboken so that's not a hard-and-fast
executive order and it's hard to argue
with someone making a recommendation we
believe we are seeing the whole
waterfront of the state no pun intended
and that we are you know we're not
patting ourselves on the back and we're
not saying we're the smartest folks in
the room but we think we have the most
amount of information on which to make
decisions like that but a recommendation
it's hard to argue with unless we have a
violent disagreement with it and as it
relates to other local or county
executive orders we'll take them as they
come but at the end of the day again I
want to be unequivocal the buck stops
with us we reserve the right to either
confirm or deny any orders that are out
there
Nikita then we'll come back to you Brett
Alex thank you again for your help so
this kind of got brought up earlier but
I was wondering do you agree with the
bailouts proposed at the federal level
and do you agree with the limits that
Senator Warren wants on those bailouts
and then are there any state-level
bailouts to plan like cutting gate fees
for Airlines at Newark so I don't really
have a comment per se about bailouts I
actually don't even know what Senator
Warren's plan or proposal is but I will
say this I don't know what form it takes
other than it better take block block
grants had better be one of the forms
but the amount of stimulus that we are
gonna need as a country and as a state
is a big number and so my only advice is
history will not be unkind to our
country if we overshoot history will be
very unkind to our country and to our
state if we under shoot so whatever is
that our disposal there's no amount of
money in any state New Jersey New York
California you name it there's no amount
of money that could deal with the the
challenges of the economic challenges
that will come from this the federal
government Congress the administration
and again the good this good news here
you know there's a lot of feeling to me
like there's a lot of bipartisan coming
together but the numbers are gonna need
to be very substantial right we unless I
missed it do we have a county-by-county
breakdown of how many cases there are
total now can we get can we get that
Alex get that to you after okay again I
just want to reiterate I did say earlier
the top four or Bergin it again if you
disagree to be telling Bergen 113 s 645
Middlesex 40 Monmouth 32 or the top four
they said oh sorry I skipped Hudson
Hudson 34 Monmouth 32 those are the top
five and we'll get the rest of the list
here please
any further progress I think you
mentioned yesterday about converting
dormitory beds or using them for
isolation oh but in the interest of time
if they disagree jump in but that's one
of the things we're talking not only oh
these folks Judy and patent looking at
that but that's some that's on the list
of projects that we want to talk to the
Army Corps about as well Elise is that
fair
for the Commissioner the recent beds
that you have identified were they in
wings of hospitals or where did they
come from
Judy if I get this wrong please correct
me we've looked at a lot of things I was
asked about dormitories I also think
about pop-up potential that I know that
we've utilized in the past via the state
police OEM it's worth noting and if I
get this wrong again I'll be corrected
that some of this also is displacing
current patients who are under
healthcare supervision for a reason
other than kovin 19 is that fair to say
handle the surge the surge is going to
come in two directions
it's gonna be the kovat 19 patients and
then the other patients that come into
the hospital to the emergency room that
are appropriate for an acute care stay
and perhaps of that it's not available
and that's where opening up a closed
hospital using an empty nursing home to
adequately take care of that level of
patient fairness a dorm is more likely
to be in a quarantine capacity for
someone who's got either low-level
symptomatic or asymptomatic we want to
isolate fair to say please we'll come
back to you truck question along with
similar topic are there any other
specific sites that you are considering
for surge capacity other than Underwood
and I know I've asked this before but
just to get an updated number what's the
current number of beds in New Jersey
that are available
Alex could get you that because we have
gone on record what does if that all
right
for what I know for what's going on in
hospitals it's those critical care beds
that are so important and I know we have
just about 2000 we have sixteen thousand
four hundred and thirty three med surg
beds and 1983 critical care ruff only by
17 other hospitals that you're looking
at other than Underwood
or facilities here we actually looked at
every closed hospital in the last ten
years and most of them were not able to
be brought online Underwood being the
most recent ones they've brought online
we're also looking at empty nursing
homes we're looking at spaces that are
under construction
outfitted with medical gases
of the appropriate ward type of a
facility so we're just about looking
like the governor says everything's on
the table
girl you hit something can you give some
more information about them where they
were from and whether they had exposure
to others or question I can tell you one
was from Essex and one was from Hudson
County
both females Essex and Hudson both over
60 years of age both having underlying
medical comorbid but I don't have a list
of what they are this is the general
information that I was just given before
we came in here
now just the counties Essex and Hudson
so I want to thank before I thank my
colleagues a couple of things we've
promised I think at least two things for
tomorrow first of all to remember to
remind everybody I think we're at noon
tomorrow unless you hear otherwise Alex
and my hand is still here you're staying
noon noon right here again on behalf of
Judy and her colleagues forgive us that
by doing it at noon cuts into the time
that they need to have the full
soup-to-nuts we're doing it because the
vice president has convened I'm not sure
the president will be on it or not but
I'll probably know when I see you
tomorrow a BT see that will that we at
least a portion of us will need to be on
we promised
two things for tomorrow one is the
details regarding the the Bergen County
Drive through a testing which will open
on Friday God willing it will give folks
explicit guidance as to what you need to
do to qualify to go to that testing site
I say testing we're using that word over
that reception site where you're going
to give your swab and then it will be
tested on the back end and then secondly
we will have our guidance as it relates
at least in part I'm not sure in full
but at least in part on elections and
will obviously have the as best we can
at that point the the overnight
realities of what we're dealing with
again I wrote down a line which I think
is that the order before us note there
is no greater call than to do something
bigger than oneself and that's what
we're talking about right now I can't
emphasize that enough this is the the
job over here of flattening the curve
getting out ahead of this thing breaking
the back of this is the job of all nine
million of us we'll do our part we need
everyone to do their part the health
care system is going to be in the hands
of the professionals the extraordinary
heroes among our health care workers
and folks like the Army Corps of
Engineers the National Guard the State
Police and others in the sense of we're
gonna flatten the curve over here but
we're not going to take any chances over
here and make sure that we've got the
equipment and the capacity that we need
and we're gonna get through this
together unequivocally assuming we all
do our part
there is no question we will get through
this together we'll be stronger than
ever before
not without mistake not without being
scathed but we will get through this on
behalf of the lieutenant governor
Commissioner Johnson colonel Callahan
and and Judy and Edie and Chris and
their extraordinary team at the
Department of Health god bless you all
we'll see you tomorrow